CONNECTOME-STRATA DEMONSTRATION  (v1)

Repository: connectome-strata
Document: Demonstration (file 6 of 6)
Version: 1

This document is a Demonstration plan. It is the owner's addition to the five
SPARC phases (Specification, Pseudocode, Architecture, Refinement, Completion),
not a SPARC phase itself. It is a plan of intent: what to run, what each step
shows, which capabilities it exhibits, and what a viewer should conclude. It is
not a finished or recorded demonstration, and it changes nothing - the repository
is FROZEN and immutable.


PART ONE - THE POINT OF THE DEMONSTRATION

The purpose is to let a viewer see, in a few minutes, that connectome-strata is a
real, running measurement of one decomposition rule - one pack per Causalontology
stratum - and that its headline result and its honest limits are both true. The
demonstration should leave the viewer able to answer one question for themselves:
is the data layer's own level boundary also the right code boundary? The intended
answer is a qualified yes, and the demonstration should make both the yes and the
qualification visible.

Before running, set the PROLOGAI_HOME environment variable to a local PrologAI
checkout, or accept the default (/home/ccaitwo/PrologAI). SWI-Prolog version 9.x
is required. Nothing in the platform is modified by any step below; every step is
read-only against it.


PART TWO - THE RUN SEQUENCE

Run these from the repository root, in order. Each is a single command.

Step one - tick the reentrant loop and read the narrated trace.

    bin/run_slice.sh 8 5 0.4

This ticks the cortex, striatum, thalamus, cortex loop for eight laps, with a
cortisol event on lap five and a learning rate of four tenths. Every line of the
output is one hop of the beat through the shared Lattice. What to watch for: the
words "via lattice" on every hop (the three co-stratal regions share one pack, yet
the beat always arrives through the shared store, never by one section calling
another); the token rising by exactly one each hop; the dopamine
reward-prediction-error starting high and shrinking as the cortex's prediction
climbs to meet the reward; and, on lap five, a one-line banner marking the
ten-stratum cortisol skip. At the end a closure verdict block reports the outcome,
the hop count against the expectation, and a pass. This shows the behaviour is
intact and the loop provably closes.

Step two - run the strict layer rule over the arm's eight packs.

    bin/check_layers.sh

This loads the platform's unmodified layer construct and checks the arm. What to
watch for: zero violations, and a report in which the stratum packs' layers (two
through six) track the Causalontology ordinals (four, six, seven, nine, fourteen).
This shows the arm's headline positive result: the layer order fell out of the
data layer's stratum ordinals for free.

Step three - prove the regions share only the Lattice.

    bin/check_no_coupling.sh

Because the three regions are co-stratal and live in one pack, this does
intra-pack section analysis. What to watch for: a pass reporting zero
region-to-region references. This shows the closure discipline holds even when the
code cut did not separate the regions.

Step four - validate every structure record, the skip, and the signature.

    bin/validate_structure.sh

This assembles the twenty-eight records from the five stratum packs and validates
each against its Causalontology 2.0.0 JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) schema and
the local semantic rules, then confirms the cortisol relation classifies as a
skipping relation with no missing-mechanism gap and the Ed25519 signature
verifies. What to watch for: twenty-eight records valid, the skip finding correct,
the signature verified. This shows the data was held constant and is well-formed.

Step five - run every pack's in-pack test suite.

    bin/run_tests.sh

What to watch for: all eight suites passing. This shows every pack is exercised and
none can rot unseen.

Optional step six - the regression guard. Through the platform's harness, the mini
regression is forty of forty on the Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus for Artificial
General Intelligence version one (ARC-AGI-1) and twelve of twelve on version two
(ARC-AGI-2). This is a ten percent spot-check, not the full benchmark; the honest
figures are 40/40 and 12/12. It shows the wider platform is not grossly broken.


PART THREE - WHAT THE DEMONSTRATION EXHIBITS

• A glass-box reentrant loop: every hop narrated as it happens, closure proven by
  exact conditions rather than asserted.

• Stigmergic coordination with notification: state shared through a common medium,
  regions woken by writes, zero region-to-region references, no busy-polling.

• Data-layer-aligned decomposition: the pack boundary is a Causalontology kind,
  the layer order tracks the stratum ordinals, and the extreme layer-skip is the
  cleanest downward edge.

• Grounded structure with native dynamics: twenty-eight validated Causalontology
  2.0.0 records for the structure, and un-stratified numeric laws for the dynamics.

• Honest measurement: gates that can fail (one is proven non-vacuous by an injected
  violation), byte-identity proofs against the slice, and five openly recorded
  limits.


PART FOUR - WHAT A VIEWER SHOULD CONCLUDE

A viewer who runs the sequence should conclude that cutting by stratum genuinely
aligns the code with the data layer for the constructs that sit at a single level:
the layer order comes free from the ordinals, structure minting localises by
level, and the hardest construct - the ten-stratum cortisol skip - becomes the
most natural downward reference. And they should conclude, with equal clarity,
that the alignment is partial: the constructs that span levels (ports, conduits,
the bridge, the skip) have no single-stratum home, the runtime loop is
single-stratum and so lives inside one heavy pack, and the packs come out uneven.

The intended overall conclusion is the one the three-arm comparison invites: no
arm dominates, and the honest reading is a hybrid - cut structure by stratum, keep
the runtime loop as its own unit, and give stratum-spanning interfaces a
first-class edge home. This arm's job was to measure the stratum cut cleanly and
honestly, and the demonstration is meant to show that it did.


PART FIVE - WHAT THIS DEMONSTRATION IS NOT

It is not a benchmark score claim: the only figures are the ten percent mini
regression, 40/40 and 12/12. It is not a modification of the platform: every step
is read-only against a frozen PrologAI. It is not a new slice or a full connectome:
it replicates the Wave 2 slice and projects to fifteen stratum packs. It is a plan
of intent for showing a frozen measurement, nothing more.

SPARC: this Demonstration is version 1, part of the six-file set for
connectome-strata (Specification v1, Pseudocode v1, Architecture v1, Refinement v1,
Completion v1, Demonstration v1).
